Updates configuration page (#1532)
pomerium/documentation: content/docs/core/configuration.md

---
title: Configuration
description: This page discusses configuration settings for Pomerium Core.
keywords: [core configuration]
sidebar_label: Configuration
---

# Configuration

> You can configure Pomerium using either a configuration file or [environmental variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_variable). If using a configuration file, the following languages are supported:

Author: Agree. Thanks for calling that out.

- [YAML](https://yaml.org/)
- [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html)

> - [TOML](https://toml.io/en/)

Author: Good point, I'll update.

Using both environmental variables and configuration file keys is allowed and encouraged (for example, secret keys are probably best set as environmental variables). However, if duplicate configuration keys are found, environment variables take precedence.

:::tip

Pomerium can hot-reload route configuration details, authorization policy, certificates, and other proxy settings.

:::

### Configuration syntax

Both configuration file keys and environment variables are case sensitive.

Configuration file keys are always lowercase and use dashes (`-`). Environmental variables are identical to configuration file keys, except they are always uppercase and use underscores (`_`).

See the [Reference](/docs/reference) page for a comprehensive list of Pomerium's configuration settings.

> ## All In One and Split Service modes

Reviewer: Actually, should we have a separate page to talk about all-in-one and split service mode? This almost feels like a different topic to me.

@desimone would love to hear your thoughts on this.

Author: Yeah, if we moved this topic to a separate page, we could offload some of the content in [High Availability](https://www.pomerium.com/docs/capabilities/high-availability) as well.

It begs the question of where we'd put a All In One vs Split Services mode page, though. Capabilities doesn't seem like the best place.

Reviewer 2: > should we have a separate page to talk about all-in-one and split service mode? This almost feels like a different topic to me.

Yes, I think that makes a lot of sense.

Author: I've created a separate issue for work on a new All in One vs Split Services Mode page:
- https://github.com/pomerium/internal/issues/1879

> ## All In One and Split Service modes

Author: So this is a style question, and a product one. We're very inconsistent in our docs with either of these modes. It's frequently used as a compound adjective, in which case "all-in-one mode" or "split-service mode" makes sense. 

Take [this page](https://www.pomerium.com/docs/core/upgrading#new-cache-service) for example:
"- For all-in-one deployments, no changes are required...
- For split-service deployments, you will need to deploy an additional service called cache..."

This is fine in this context. 

When we refer to is as a deployment type, it's actually a noun, if not a proper noun. For example, [this page](https://www.pomerium.com/docs/reference/service-urls#authenticate-internal-service-url) shows the inconsistency and how it's used as a noun:
"The other service URL settings are needed only for split service deployments. When running in all-in-one mode (which is the recommended mode), these settings are not needed."

We have the liberty to decide how it should be used in our docs. In my opinion, these modes should be referred to as proper nouns, so "All In One mode" or "Split Service mode". I don't mind changing it to "All-in-One" mode and "Split-Service" mode, or "All in One" mode (we don't have to capitalize "in" either) and "Split Service" mode, but we should define it and stick to it.

I can be lazy about it as well. This is where a style guide would help enforce the decision. Thoughts?

---
title: Configuration
description: This page discusses configuration settings for Pomerium Core.
keywords: [core configuration]
sidebar_label: Configuration
---

# Configuration

You can configure Pomerium using either a configuration file or [environment variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_variable). If using a configuration file, the following languages are supported:

- [YAML](https://yaml.org/)
- [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html)
- [TOML](https://toml.io/en/)

(Our documentation always assumes a YAML configuration file.)

You can use both environment variables and a configuration file. If a particular option is set using both an environment variable and a config file key, the environment variable will take precedence.

:::tip

Pomerium can hot-reload route configuration details, authorization policy, certificates, and other proxy settings.

:::

### Configuration syntax

Both configuration file keys and environment variables are case sensitive.

> Configuration file keys are always lowercase. Environmental variables are identical to configuration file keys, except they are always uppercase.

Reviewer: Environmental -> environment here if we want to be consistent with this.

Author: I missed this instance and updated it for this page. But, there are many instances elsewhere in our docs that use "environmental". I'll note this decision for future PRs, though.

See the [Reference](/docs/reference) page for a comprehensive list of Pomerium's configuration settings.

## All-In-One and Split-Service modes

You can configure Pomerium using either All-In-One mode or Split Service mode.

### All-In-One mode

> All-In-One mode means all of Pomerium's configuration settings are set in a single configuration file. You can use All-In-One mode when running Pomerium:

Reviewer: For me this is not a clear explanation of the difference between all-in-one and split service mode.

In all-in-one mode, a single Pomerium process runs all of the four logical services. In split service mode, each logical service runs as its own process.

Author: Updated.

> All-In-One mode means all of Pomerium's configuration settings are set in a single configuration file. You can use All-In-One mode when running Pomerium:

Reviewer: I would prefer we pick one way to write "all-in-one" mode and use it consistently. By my count the existing docs have:
- 49 instances of "all-in-one"
- 3 instances of "All-in-One"
- 1 instance each of "All-in-one" and "All-in-One"

Based on the existing usage "All-In-One" looks out of place to me here.

Author: OK. I left a comment earlier which explains my position on this. But, I've updated this page so that is uses "All-in-One".

Reviewer: For the record, I'm saying "all-in-one" (lowercase) would be most consistent with the existing documentation. If you don't think we should aim to be consistent I won't argue the point any further.

- As a single system service or container, or

> - In a distributed environment where there are multiple processes that each handle separate [Pomerium services](/docs/internals/architecture#component-level).

Reviewer: I don't understand what this is saying. In all-in-one mode the services are combined, not separate.

All-in-One mode is the default configuration mode, and the easiest way to configure Pomerium.

### Split-Service mode

> Alternately, you can create individual configuration files (or sets of environment variables) for each Pomerium service. In Split-Service mode, each configuration file (or set of environment variables) defines which service a process will run by using the [service mode](/docs/reference/service-mode) key.

Reviewer: I think it would be good to start with a brief explanation of how split service mode differs from all-in-one mode. Probably also good to link to the Service URL Settings page here. Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
Alternatively, you can run each Pomerium service as its own process. You might want to do this in order to scale each service independently, or so that you can enforce different permissions on each service.

To configure Pomerium in this mode, you will need to create individual configuration files (or sets of environment variables) for each Pomerium service. Each configuration should set the [Service Mode](/docs/reference/service-mode) option to tell Pomerium which service to run. You will also need the [Service URL Settings](/docs/reference/service-urls) to tell each Pomerium service how to communicate with the other Pomerium services.
```

:::tip Our recommendation

> We recommend All-in-One mode to configure Pomerium for the following reasons:

Reviewer: The word order here feels backwards to me.

```suggestion
We recommend running Pomerium in all-in-one mode for the following reasons:
```
